site/src/content/clients/codex.md, before:

---
name: Codex
company: OpenAI
logo: /logos/openai.svg
transports: ['stdio', 'streamable-http']
configFormat: cli
configLocation: ~/.codex/config.toml
accuracy: 4
order: 13
---

## Configuration

Codex CLI supports MCP servers via TOML configuration with stdio and HTTP streaming transports.

### Config File Location

- **Configuration:** `~/.codex/config.toml`
- Shared between CLI and IDE extension

### stdio Configuration (Local)

```toml
[mcp_servers.home-assistant]
command = "uvx"
args = ["ha-mcp@latest"]

[mcp_servers.home-assistant.env]
HOMEASSISTANT_URL = "{{HOMEASSISTANT_URL}}"
HOMEASSISTANT_TOKEN = "{{HOMEASSISTANT_TOKEN}}"
```

### Streamable HTTP Configuration (Network/Remote)

```toml
[mcp_servers.home-assistant]
url = "{{MCP_SERVER_URL}}"
```

### With Authentication

```toml
[mcp_servers.home-assistant]
url = "{{MCP_SERVER_URL}}"

[mcp_servers.home-assistant.headers]
Authorization = "Bearer {{API_TOKEN}}"
```

## Quick Setup with CLI Commands

### stdio (Local)

```bash
codex mcp add homeassistant --env HOMEASSISTANT_URL={{HOMEASSISTANT_URL}} --env HOMEASSISTANT_TOKEN={{HOMEASSISTANT_TOKEN}} -- uvx ha-mcp@latest
```

### HTTP Streaming (Network/Remote)

```bash
codex mcp add home-assistant --url {{MCP_SERVER_URL}}
```

## Management Commands

```bash
# List configured servers
codex mcp list

# Show server details
codex mcp get home-assistant

# Remove a server
codex mcp remove home-assistant
```

## Notes

- Configuration uses TOML format (not JSON)
- Supports stdio and HTTP streaming transports
- OAuth 2.0 authentication available for remote servers
- Config file shared between CLI and IDE extension

Commit message:

docs: add Codex Desktop UI MCP quick setup

site/src/content/clients/codex.md, after:

---
name: Codex
company: OpenAI
logo: /logos/openai.svg
transports: ['stdio', 'streamable-http']
configFormat: cli
configLocation: ~/.codex/config.toml
accuracy: 4
order: 13
---

## Configuration

Codex CLI supports MCP servers via TOML configuration with stdio and HTTP streaming transports.

### Config File Location

- **Configuration:** `~/.codex/config.toml`
- Shared between CLI and IDE extension

### stdio Configuration (Local)

```toml
[mcp_servers.home-assistant]
command = "uvx"
args = ["ha-mcp@latest"]

[mcp_servers.home-assistant.env]
HOMEASSISTANT_URL = "{{HOMEASSISTANT_URL}}"
HOMEASSISTANT_TOKEN = "{{HOMEASSISTANT_TOKEN}}"
```

### Streamable HTTP Configuration (Network/Remote)

```toml
[mcp_servers.home-assistant]
url = "{{MCP_SERVER_URL}}"
```

### With Authentication

```toml
[mcp_servers.home-assistant]
url = "{{MCP_SERVER_URL}}"

[mcp_servers.home-assistant.headers]
Authorization = "Bearer {{API_TOKEN}}"
```

## Quick Setup with CLI Commands

### stdio (Local)

```bash
codex mcp add homeassistant --env HOMEASSISTANT_URL={{HOMEASSISTANT_URL}} --env HOMEASSISTANT_TOKEN={{HOMEASSISTANT_TOKEN}} -- uvx ha-mcp@latest
```

### HTTP Streaming (Network/Remote)

```bash
codex mcp add home-assistant --url {{MCP_SERVER_URL}}
```

## Quick Setup with Codex Desktop UI

Codex Desktop supports MCP servers via **STDIO** or **Streamable HTTP**.
For local machine setup with `ha-mcp`, use **STDIO** so Codex launches `ha-mcp` as a subprocess.

### Local Machine (STDIO)

1. Open Codex Desktop
2. Go to **Settings** → **MCP**
3. Click **Add Server**
4. Set:
   - **Type:** `STDIO`
   - **Name:** `homeassistant` (or `ha-mcp`)
   - **Command:** `uvx`
   - **Args:** `ha-mcp@latest`
5. Add environment variables:
   - `HOMEASSISTANT_URL={{HOMEASSISTANT_URL}}`
   - `HOMEASSISTANT_TOKEN={{HOMEASSISTANT_TOKEN}}`

### When to Use Streamable HTTP

Use **Streamable HTTP** only when `ha-mcp` is running as a network HTTP server (for example behind a reverse proxy or tunnel).
For local machine setup, use **STDIO**.

## Management Commands

```bash
# List configured servers
codex mcp list

# Show server details
codex mcp get home-assistant

# Remove a server
codex mcp remove home-assistant
```

## Notes

- Configuration uses TOML format (not JSON)
- Supports stdio and HTTP streaming transports
- OAuth 2.0 authentication available for remote servers
- Config file shared between CLI and IDE extension
