homeassistant-addon/DOCS.md, before:

# Home Assistant MCP Server Add-on

AI assistant integration for Home Assistant via Model Context Protocol (MCP).

## About

This add-on enables AI assistants (Claude, ChatGPT, etc.) to control your Home Assistant installation through the Model Context Protocol (MCP). It provides 80+ tools for device control, automation management, entity search, calendars, todo lists, dashboards, backup/restore, history/statistics, camera snapshots, and system queries.

**Key Features:**
- **Zero Configuration** - Automatically discovers Home Assistant connection
- **Secure by Default** - Auto-generated secret paths with 128-bit entropy
- **Fuzzy Search** - Find entities even with typos
- **Deep Search** - Search within automation triggers, script sequences, and helper configs
- **Backup & Restore** - Safe configuration management

Full features and documentation: https://github.com/homeassistant-ai/ha-mcp

---

## Installation


1. **Click the button to add the repository** to your Home Assistant instance:

   [![Add Repository](https://my.home-assistant.io/badges/supervisor_add_addon_repository.svg)](https://my.home-assistant.io/redirect/supervisor_add_addon_repository/?repository_url=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fhomeassistant-ai%2Fha-mcp)

   Or manually add this repository URL in Supervisor → Add-on Store:
   ```
   https://github.com/homeassistant-ai/ha-mcp
   ```

2. **Navigate to the add-on** "Home Assistant MCP Server" from the add-on store

3. **Click Install, Wait and then Start**

4. **Check the add-on logs** for your unique MCP server URL:

   ```
   🔐 MCP Server URL: http://192.168.1.100:9583/private_zctpwlX7ZkIAr7oqdfLPxw

   ```

5. **Configure your AI client** using one of the options below

---

## Client Configuration

### <details><summary><b>📱 Claude Desktop</b></summary>

Claude Desktop requires a proxy to connect to HTTP MCP servers. Install **mcp-proxy** first:

```bash
# Install mcp-proxy
uv tool install mcp-proxy
# or
pipx install mcp-proxy
```

Then add to your Claude Desktop configuration file:

**Location:**
- macOS: `~/Library/Application Support/Claude/claude_desktop_config.json`
- Windows: `%APPDATA%\Claude\claude_desktop_config.json`

**Configuration:**
```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "home-assistant": {
      "command": "mcp-proxy",
      "args": ["--transport", "streamablehttp", "http://192.168.1.100:9583/private_zctpwlX7ZkIAr7oqdfLPxw"]
    }
  }
}
```

Replace the URL in `args` with the one from your add-on logs.

**Restart Claude Desktop** after saving the configuration.

**How it works:** mcp-proxy converts the HTTP endpoint to stdio that Claude Desktop can use.

</details>

### <details><summary><b>💻 Claude Code</b></summary>

Use the `claude mcp add` command:

```bash
claude mcp add-json home-assistant '{
  "url": "http://192.168.1.100:9583/private_zctpwlX7ZkIAr7oqdfLPxw",
  "transport": "http"
}'
```

Replace the URL with the one from your add-on logs.

**Restart Claude Code** after adding the configuration.

</details>

### <details><summary><b>🌐 Web Clients (Claude.ai, ChatGPT, etc.)</b></summary>

For secure remote access without port forwarding, use the **Cloudflared add-on**:

#### Install Cloudflared Add-on

[![Add Cloudflared Repository](https://my.home-assistant.io/badges/supervisor_add_addon_repository.svg)](https://my.home-assistant.io/redirect/supervisor_add_addon_repository/?repository_url=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fbrenner-tobias%2Faddon-cloudflared)

#### Configure Cloudflared

**Note:** The Cloudflared add-on requires a Cloudflare account and uses named tunnels. You'll need to authenticate via the browser flow when first setting up the tunnel.

Add to Cloudflared add-on configuration:

```yaml
additional_hosts:
  - hostname: ha-mcp  # Named tunnel (requires Cloudflare account)
    service: http://localhost:9583
```

Or with a custom domain (requires DNS setup in Cloudflare):
```yaml
additional_hosts:
  - hostname: ha-mcp.yourdomain.com
    service: http://localhost:9583
```

#### Authenticate and Get Your Public URL

When you first start Cloudflared:

1. **Check the add-on logs** for an authentication URL like:
   ```
   Please open the following URL and log in with your Cloudflare account:
   https://xyz.cloudflare.com/argotunnel?...
   ```

2. **Open the URL in your browser**, log in with your Cloudflare account, and select a website to authorize the tunnel

3. **After authentication**, the logs will show your tunnel URL:
   - Named tunnel: `https://ha-mcp-<random>.cfargotunnel.com`
   - Custom domain: `https://ha-mcp.yourdomain.com` (if DNS configured)

#### Use Your MCP Server

Combine the Cloudflare tunnel URL with your secret path:
```
https://ha-mcp-<random>.cfargotunnel.com/private_zctpwlX7ZkIAr7oqdfLPxw
```

**Benefits:**
- No port forwarding required
- Automatic HTTPS encryption
- Optional Cloudflare Zero Trust authentication
- Centrally managed with other Home Assistant services

**Note on Quick Tunnels:** True Quick Tunnel mode (temporary `*.trycloudflare.com` URLs without account) requires running `cloudflared tunnel --url http://localhost:9583` directly via CLI or Docker, which is not supported by this add-on. The Home Assistant Cloudflared add-on uses named tunnels that require a Cloudflare account for authentication and management.

See [Cloudflared add-on documentation](https://github.com/brenner-tobias/addon-cloudflared/blob/main/cloudflared/DOCS.md) for advanced configuration.

</details>

---

## Configuration Options

The add-on has minimal configuration - most settings are automatic.

### backup_hint (Advanced)

**Default:** `normal`

Controls when the AI assistant suggests creating backups before operations:

- `normal` (recommended): Before irreversible operations only
- `strong`: Before first modification of each session
- `weak`: Rarely suggests backups
- `auto`: Intelligent detection (future enhancement)

**Note:** This is an advanced option. Enable "Show unused optional configuration options" in the add-on configuration UI to see it.

### secret_path (Advanced)

**Default:** Empty (auto-generated)

Custom secret path override. **Leave empty for auto-generation** (recommended).

- When empty, the add-on generates a secure 128-bit random path on first start
- The path is persisted to `/data/secret_path.txt` and reused on restarts
- Custom paths are useful for migration or specific security requirements

**Note:** This is an advanced option. Enable "Show unused optional configuration options" in the add-on configuration UI to see it.

**Example Configuration:**

```yaml
backup_hint: normal
secret_path: ""  # Leave empty for auto-generation
```

---

## Security

### Auto-Generated Secret Paths

The add-on automatically generates a unique secret path on first startup using 128-bit cryptographic entropy. This ensures:

- Each installation has a unique, unpredictable endpoint
- The secret is persisted across restarts
- No manual configuration needed

### Authentication

The add-on uses Home Assistant Supervisor's built-in authentication. No tokens or credentials are needed - the add-on automatically authenticates with your Home Assistant instance.

### Network Exposure

- **Local network only by default** - The add-on listens on port 9583
- **Remote access** - Use the Cloudflared add-on for secure HTTPS tunnels
- **Never expose** port 9583 directly to the internet without proper security measures

---

## Troubleshooting

### Add-on won't start

**Check the logs** for errors:
- Configuration validation errors
- Dependency installation failures
- Port conflicts (9583 already in use)

**Solution:** Review the error message and adjust configuration or free up the port.

### Can't connect to MCP server

**Verify:**
1. Add-on is running (check status in Supervisor)
2. You copied the **complete URL** including the secret path from logs
3. Your MCP client configuration is correct
4. No firewall blocking port 9583 on your local network

**Solution:** Restart the add-on and copy the URL from fresh logs.

### Lost the secret URL

**Options:**
1. Check the add-on logs (scroll to startup messages)
2. Restart the add-on (logs will show the URL again)
3. Read directly from `/data/secret_path.txt` using the Terminal & SSH add-on
4. Generate a new secret by deleting `/data/secret_path.txt` and restarting

### Operations failing

**Check add-on logs** for detailed error messages. Common issues:

- Invalid entity IDs (use fuzzy search to find correct IDs)
- Missing permissions (add-on should have full access)
- Home Assistant API errors (check HA logs)

**Solution:** Review the specific error in logs and adjust your commands accordingly.

### Performance issues

If the add-on is slow or unresponsive:

1. Check Home Assistant system resources (CPU, memory)
2. Review add-on logs for warnings
3. Restart the add-on
4. Consider reducing concurrent AI assistant operations

---

## Available Tools

The add-on provides 80+ MCP tools for controlling Home Assistant:

### Core Tools
- `ha_search_entities` - Fuzzy entity search
- `ha_deep_search` - Search within automation/script/helper configurations
- `ha_get_overview` - System overview
- `ha_get_state` - Entity state with details
- `ha_call_service` - Universal service control
- `ha_list_services` - List available services

### Configuration Management
- **Helpers**: `ha_config_list_helpers`, `ha_config_set_helper`, `ha_config_remove_helper`
- **Scripts**: `ha_config_get_script`, `ha_config_set_script`, `ha_config_remove_script`
- **Automations**: `ha_config_get_automation`, `ha_config_set_automation`, `ha_config_remove_automation`
- **Groups**: `ha_config_list_groups`, `ha_config_set_group`, `ha_config_remove_group`
- **Dashboards**: `ha_config_get_dashboard`, `ha_config_set_dashboard`, `ha_config_delete_dashboard`
- **Areas & Floors**: `ha_config_list_areas`, `ha_config_set_area`, `ha_config_remove_area`, `ha_config_list_floors`, `ha_config_set_floor`, `ha_config_remove_floor`
- **Labels**: `ha_config_get_label`, `ha_config_set_label`, `ha_config_remove_label`, `ha_manage_entity_labels`
- **Zones**: `ha_get_zone`, `ha_create_zone`, `ha_update_zone`, `ha_delete_zone`

### Todo & Calendar
- **Todo Lists**: `ha_get_todo`, `ha_add_todo_item`, `ha_update_todo_item`, `ha_remove_todo_item`
- **Calendar**: `ha_config_get_calendar_events`, `ha_config_set_calendar_event`, `ha_config_remove_calendar_event`

### Device Control
- `ha_bulk_control` - Multi-device control with verification
- `ha_get_operation_status` - Check operation status
- `ha_get_device`, `ha_update_device`, `ha_remove_device`
- `ha_rename_entity` - Rename entity ID

### History & Monitoring
- `ha_get_history` - Query entity state history with time ranges
- `ha_get_statistics` - Long-term statistics for sensors (energy, climate, etc.)
- `ha_get_automation_traces` - Execution traces for automation debugging
- `ha_get_camera_image` - Capture camera snapshots

### ZHA & Integration Tools
- `ha_get_zha_devices` - List ZHA (Zigbee) devices with endpoints and clusters
- `ha_get_entity_integration_source` - Get integration source for any entity

### Add-ons (Supervisor only)
- `ha_get_addon` - List installed or available add-ons (source="installed" or "available")

### System & Updates
- `ha_check_config`, `ha_restart`, `ha_reload_core`
- `ha_get_system_info`, `ha_get_system_health`
- `ha_get_updates` - List updates or get details for a specific update entity

### Blueprints
- `ha_list_blueprints`, `ha_get_blueprint`, `ha_import_blueprint`

### Backup & Restore
- `ha_backup_create` - Fast local backups
- `ha_backup_restore` - Restore from backup

### Utility
- `ha_get_logbook` - Historical events
- `ha_eval_template` - Evaluate Jinja2 templates
- `ha_get_domain_docs` - Domain documentation
- `ha_get_integration` - List or get integration info

See the [main repository](https://github.com/homeassistant-ai/ha-mcp) for detailed tool documentation and examples.

---

## Support

**Issues and Bug Reports:**
https://github.com/homeassistant-ai/ha-mcp/issues

**Documentation:**
https://github.com/homeassistant-ai/ha-mcp

**Contributing:**
https://github.com/homeassistant-ai/ha-mcp/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md

---

## License

This add-on is licensed under the MIT License.

See [LICENSE](https://github.com/homeassistant-ai/ha-mcp/blob/master/LICENSE) for full license text.

Commit message:

docs: document access_token config option and 405 troubleshooting
Add access_token to Configuration Options with setup instructions,
update Authentication section to mention direct API access, and add
troubleshooting entry for the 405 DELETE error.

https://claude.ai/code/session_01HygtZHFem9bSsU73gm1mSz

homeassistant-addon/DOCS.md, after:

# Home Assistant MCP Server Add-on

AI assistant integration for Home Assistant via Model Context Protocol (MCP).

## About

This add-on enables AI assistants (Claude, ChatGPT, etc.) to control your Home Assistant installation through the Model Context Protocol (MCP). It provides 80+ tools for device control, automation management, entity search, calendars, todo lists, dashboards, backup/restore, history/statistics, camera snapshots, and system queries.

**Key Features:**
- **Zero Configuration** - Automatically discovers Home Assistant connection
- **Secure by Default** - Auto-generated secret paths with 128-bit entropy
- **Fuzzy Search** - Find entities even with typos
- **Deep Search** - Search within automation triggers, script sequences, and helper configs
- **Backup & Restore** - Safe configuration management

Full features and documentation: https://github.com/homeassistant-ai/ha-mcp

---

## Installation


1. **Click the button to add the repository** to your Home Assistant instance:

   [![Add Repository](https://my.home-assistant.io/badges/supervisor_add_addon_repository.svg)](https://my.home-assistant.io/redirect/supervisor_add_addon_repository/?repository_url=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fhomeassistant-ai%2Fha-mcp)

   Or manually add this repository URL in Supervisor → Add-on Store:
   ```
   https://github.com/homeassistant-ai/ha-mcp
   ```

2. **Navigate to the add-on** "Home Assistant MCP Server" from the add-on store

3. **Click Install, Wait and then Start**

4. **Check the add-on logs** for your unique MCP server URL:

   ```
   🔐 MCP Server URL: http://192.168.1.100:9583/private_zctpwlX7ZkIAr7oqdfLPxw

   ```

5. **Configure your AI client** using one of the options below

---

## Client Configuration

### <details><summary><b>📱 Claude Desktop</b></summary>

Claude Desktop requires a proxy to connect to HTTP MCP servers. Install **mcp-proxy** first:

```bash
# Install mcp-proxy
uv tool install mcp-proxy
# or
pipx install mcp-proxy
```

Then add to your Claude Desktop configuration file:

**Location:**
- macOS: `~/Library/Application Support/Claude/claude_desktop_config.json`
- Windows: `%APPDATA%\Claude\claude_desktop_config.json`

**Configuration:**
```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "home-assistant": {
      "command": "mcp-proxy",
      "args": ["--transport", "streamablehttp", "http://192.168.1.100:9583/private_zctpwlX7ZkIAr7oqdfLPxw"]
    }
  }
}
```

Replace the URL in `args` with the one from your add-on logs.

**Restart Claude Desktop** after saving the configuration.

**How it works:** mcp-proxy converts the HTTP endpoint to stdio that Claude Desktop can use.

</details>

### <details><summary><b>💻 Claude Code</b></summary>

Use the `claude mcp add` command:

```bash
claude mcp add-json home-assistant '{
  "url": "http://192.168.1.100:9583/private_zctpwlX7ZkIAr7oqdfLPxw",
  "transport": "http"
}'
```

Replace the URL with the one from your add-on logs.

**Restart Claude Code** after adding the configuration.

</details>

### <details><summary><b>🌐 Web Clients (Claude.ai, ChatGPT, etc.)</b></summary>

For secure remote access without port forwarding, use the **Cloudflared add-on**:

#### Install Cloudflared Add-on

[![Add Cloudflared Repository](https://my.home-assistant.io/badges/supervisor_add_addon_repository.svg)](https://my.home-assistant.io/redirect/supervisor_add_addon_repository/?repository_url=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fbrenner-tobias%2Faddon-cloudflared)

#### Configure Cloudflared

**Note:** The Cloudflared add-on requires a Cloudflare account and uses named tunnels. You'll need to authenticate via the browser flow when first setting up the tunnel.

Add to Cloudflared add-on configuration:

```yaml
additional_hosts:
  - hostname: ha-mcp  # Named tunnel (requires Cloudflare account)
    service: http://localhost:9583
```

Or with a custom domain (requires DNS setup in Cloudflare):
```yaml
additional_hosts:
  - hostname: ha-mcp.yourdomain.com
    service: http://localhost:9583
```

#### Authenticate and Get Your Public URL

When you first start Cloudflared:

1. **Check the add-on logs** for an authentication URL like:
   ```
   Please open the following URL and log in with your Cloudflare account:
   https://xyz.cloudflare.com/argotunnel?...
   ```

2. **Open the URL in your browser**, log in with your Cloudflare account, and select a website to authorize the tunnel

3. **After authentication**, the logs will show your tunnel URL:
   - Named tunnel: `https://ha-mcp-<random>.cfargotunnel.com`
   - Custom domain: `https://ha-mcp.yourdomain.com` (if DNS configured)

#### Use Your MCP Server

Combine the Cloudflare tunnel URL with your secret path:
```
https://ha-mcp-<random>.cfargotunnel.com/private_zctpwlX7ZkIAr7oqdfLPxw
```

**Benefits:**
- No port forwarding required
- Automatic HTTPS encryption
- Optional Cloudflare Zero Trust authentication
- Centrally managed with other Home Assistant services

**Note on Quick Tunnels:** True Quick Tunnel mode (temporary `*.trycloudflare.com` URLs without account) requires running `cloudflared tunnel --url http://localhost:9583` directly via CLI or Docker, which is not supported by this add-on. The Home Assistant Cloudflared add-on uses named tunnels that require a Cloudflare account for authentication and management.

See [Cloudflared add-on documentation](https://github.com/brenner-tobias/addon-cloudflared/blob/main/cloudflared/DOCS.md) for advanced configuration.

</details>

---

## Configuration Options

The add-on has minimal configuration - most settings are automatic.

### backup_hint (Advanced)

**Default:** `normal`

Controls when the AI assistant suggests creating backups before operations:

- `normal` (recommended): Before irreversible operations only
- `strong`: Before first modification of each session
- `weak`: Rarely suggests backups
- `auto`: Intelligent detection (future enhancement)

**Note:** This is an advanced option. Enable "Show unused optional configuration options" in the add-on configuration UI to see it.

### secret_path (Advanced)

**Default:** Empty (auto-generated)

Custom secret path override. **Leave empty for auto-generation** (recommended).

- When empty, the add-on generates a secure 128-bit random path on first start
- The path is persisted to `/data/secret_path.txt` and reused on restarts
- Custom paths are useful for migration or specific security requirements

**Note:** This is an advanced option. Enable "Show unused optional configuration options" in the add-on configuration UI to see it.

### access_token (Advanced)

**Default:** Empty (uses Supervisor token)

Optional Home Assistant Long-Lived Access Token. When provided, the add-on bypasses the Supervisor proxy and connects directly to Home Assistant's API.

**Why use this?** The Supervisor proxy only allows GET and POST HTTP methods, which blocks DELETE operations. If you need to delete automations or scripts via MCP tools (`ha_config_remove_automation`, `ha_config_remove_script`), you must configure a Long-Lived Access Token.

**How to create a Long-Lived Access Token:**
1. Go to your Home Assistant profile: **Settings > People > (your user)**
2. Scroll down to **Long-Lived Access Tokens**
3. Click **Create Token**, give it a name (e.g., "MCP Server")
4. Copy the token and paste it into this field

**Note:** This is an advanced option. Enable "Show unused optional configuration options" in the add-on configuration UI to see it.

**Example Configuration:**

```yaml
backup_hint: normal
secret_path: ""  # Leave empty for auto-generation
access_token: "your_long_lived_access_token_here"
```

---

## Security

### Auto-Generated Secret Paths

The add-on automatically generates a unique secret path on first startup using 128-bit cryptographic entropy. This ensures:

- Each installation has a unique, unpredictable endpoint
- The secret is persisted across restarts
- No manual configuration needed

### Authentication

The add-on uses Home Assistant Supervisor's built-in authentication by default. No tokens or credentials are needed - the add-on automatically authenticates with your Home Assistant instance.

**Optional:** If you configure a [Long-Lived Access Token](#access_token-advanced), the add-on connects directly to Home Assistant, bypassing the Supervisor proxy. This enables full API access including DELETE operations.

### Network Exposure

- **Local network only by default** - The add-on listens on port 9583
- **Remote access** - Use the Cloudflared add-on for secure HTTPS tunnels
- **Never expose** port 9583 directly to the internet without proper security measures

---

## Troubleshooting

### Add-on won't start

**Check the logs** for errors:
- Configuration validation errors
- Dependency installation failures
- Port conflicts (9583 already in use)

**Solution:** Review the error message and adjust configuration or free up the port.

### Can't connect to MCP server

**Verify:**
1. Add-on is running (check status in Supervisor)
2. You copied the **complete URL** including the secret path from logs
3. Your MCP client configuration is correct
4. No firewall blocking port 9583 on your local network

**Solution:** Restart the add-on and copy the URL from fresh logs.

### Lost the secret URL

**Options:**
1. Check the add-on logs (scroll to startup messages)
2. Restart the add-on (logs will show the URL again)
3. Read directly from `/data/secret_path.txt` using the Terminal & SSH add-on
4. Generate a new secret by deleting `/data/secret_path.txt` and restarting

### Cannot delete automations or scripts (405 error)

If `ha_config_remove_automation` or `ha_config_remove_script` returns **405 Method Not Allowed**, this is because the Supervisor proxy only supports GET and POST HTTP methods.

**Solution:** Configure a [Long-Lived Access Token](#access_token-advanced) in the add-on settings. This bypasses the Supervisor proxy and connects directly to Home Assistant's API, enabling DELETE operations.

### Operations failing

**Check add-on logs** for detailed error messages. Common issues:

- Invalid entity IDs (use fuzzy search to find correct IDs)
- Missing permissions (add-on should have full access)
- Home Assistant API errors (check HA logs)

**Solution:** Review the specific error in logs and adjust your commands accordingly.

### Performance issues

If the add-on is slow or unresponsive:

1. Check Home Assistant system resources (CPU, memory)
2. Review add-on logs for warnings
3. Restart the add-on
4. Consider reducing concurrent AI assistant operations

---

## Available Tools

The add-on provides 80+ MCP tools for controlling Home Assistant:

### Core Tools
- `ha_search_entities` - Fuzzy entity search
- `ha_deep_search` - Search within automation/script/helper configurations
- `ha_get_overview` - System overview
- `ha_get_state` - Entity state with details
- `ha_call_service` - Universal service control
- `ha_list_services` - List available services

### Configuration Management
- **Helpers**: `ha_config_list_helpers`, `ha_config_set_helper`, `ha_config_remove_helper`
- **Scripts**: `ha_config_get_script`, `ha_config_set_script`, `ha_config_remove_script`
- **Automations**: `ha_config_get_automation`, `ha_config_set_automation`, `ha_config_remove_automation`
- **Groups**: `ha_config_list_groups`, `ha_config_set_group`, `ha_config_remove_group`
- **Dashboards**: `ha_config_get_dashboard`, `ha_config_set_dashboard`, `ha_config_delete_dashboard`
- **Areas & Floors**: `ha_config_list_areas`, `ha_config_set_area`, `ha_config_remove_area`, `ha_config_list_floors`, `ha_config_set_floor`, `ha_config_remove_floor`
- **Labels**: `ha_config_get_label`, `ha_config_set_label`, `ha_config_remove_label`, `ha_manage_entity_labels`
- **Zones**: `ha_get_zone`, `ha_create_zone`, `ha_update_zone`, `ha_delete_zone`

### Todo & Calendar
- **Todo Lists**: `ha_get_todo`, `ha_add_todo_item`, `ha_update_todo_item`, `ha_remove_todo_item`
- **Calendar**: `ha_config_get_calendar_events`, `ha_config_set_calendar_event`, `ha_config_remove_calendar_event`

### Device Control
- `ha_bulk_control` - Multi-device control with verification
- `ha_get_operation_status` - Check operation status
- `ha_get_device`, `ha_update_device`, `ha_remove_device`
- `ha_rename_entity` - Rename entity ID

### History & Monitoring
- `ha_get_history` - Query entity state history with time ranges
- `ha_get_statistics` - Long-term statistics for sensors (energy, climate, etc.)
- `ha_get_automation_traces` - Execution traces for automation debugging
- `ha_get_camera_image` - Capture camera snapshots

### ZHA & Integration Tools
- `ha_get_zha_devices` - List ZHA (Zigbee) devices with endpoints and clusters
- `ha_get_entity_integration_source` - Get integration source for any entity

### Add-ons (Supervisor only)
- `ha_get_addon` - List installed or available add-ons (source="installed" or "available")

### System & Updates
- `ha_check_config`, `ha_restart`, `ha_reload_core`
- `ha_get_system_info`, `ha_get_system_health`
- `ha_get_updates` - List updates or get details for a specific update entity

### Blueprints
- `ha_list_blueprints`, `ha_get_blueprint`, `ha_import_blueprint`

### Backup & Restore
- `ha_backup_create` - Fast local backups
- `ha_backup_restore` - Restore from backup

### Utility
- `ha_get_logbook` - Historical events
- `ha_eval_template` - Evaluate Jinja2 templates
- `ha_get_domain_docs` - Domain documentation
- `ha_get_integration` - List or get integration info

See the [main repository](https://github.com/homeassistant-ai/ha-mcp) for detailed tool documentation and examples.

---

## Support

**Issues and Bug Reports:**
https://github.com/homeassistant-ai/ha-mcp/issues

**Documentation:**
https://github.com/homeassistant-ai/ha-mcp

**Contributing:**
https://github.com/homeassistant-ai/ha-mcp/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md

---

## License

This add-on is licensed under the MIT License.

See [LICENSE](https://github.com/homeassistant-ai/ha-mcp/blob/master/LICENSE) for full license text.
